

Bradley International Airport Triennial Disaster Drill October 9, 2003  ﬁAfter Action Reportﬂ  Overview: Under the Bradley International Airport Emergency Plan, a full scale exercise shall be conducted every three years.  All Participants of the Emergency Plan were invited to the exercise.

Date:  The exercise was conducted on Saturday, September 13,    2003 at 0900hrs. Location:  Taxi Lane ﬁMikeﬂ and the field adjacent to the Taxi Lane.  Participants: 150 volunteer victims, 300 participants from various        agencies that are identified in the Airport Emergency Plan. Meetings: Planning for this full scale exercise started April 2, 2003   during the Tabletop exercise. Participants of the Tabletop    exercise were informed of the full scale drill date.  Four (4)    planning meetings were conducted through the months of

July to September to provide individual agencies the    opportunity to identify their specific goals and objectives to    be achieved during this drill. Drill Objective:

Better Inter-Agency Communication  Scenario A pilot of a DC-9 reported to the tower there was smoke in the cockpit, the aircraft was 10 minutes out with 5,000 pounds of fuel and 95 SOB™s.  During approach to runway 15 the pilot aborted the landing and crashed on Taxi Lane ﬁMikeﬂ. Debris struck vehicles outside the fence line complicating the incident with one bus fire, (2) cars requiring  1extrication of passengers and (1) bus on its side requiring extrication of passengers.

The drill area was set-up with a DC-9 aircraft located on Taxi Lane ﬁMikeﬂ with 95 passengers moulaged to simulate various injuries.  A bus fire in the open field, (2) cars and a bus turned over and outfitted with mannequins to simulate fire and extrication functions. Summary All Emergency services functions and additional support staff operated at this drill.  Below are comments from evaluators and staff that performed or monitored individual functions at the drill  Fire: All Bradley ARFF units responded to their stand-by positions upon activation of the Alert 2,  Command-9 requested a 2nd alarm response for mutual aid from the surrounding Towns.  Rescue 7 responded to the staging area as the Staging Officer for the 2nd alarm response.  Upon the Alert 3 activation Bradley ARFF units provided an initial water attack, with Rescue 13, 12 11, to the aircraft (simulated water curtain in an area 200 feet from the aircraft).  Engine 110 responded to the water supply area and then was redirected to the aircraft fuselage by the Incident Commander.  Upon activation of the Alert 3, Chief Duffy assumed command of the incident and assigned Command-9 to the Fire Ground Operation Officer position.  Mutual aid apparatus were assigned to the bus fire and the car & bus extrication scenarios.  Rescue 14 was assigned to fight the bus fire along with mutual aid departments.  Initial attack to provide rescue path for the passengers evacuating from the aircraft was conducted by Airport ARFF unit consisting of (3) crash trucks with 6,000 gallons of water/foam combination and 1500 pounds of dry chemical/halotron .  ARFF Engine company (Engine 110) consisting of (2) EMS/Firefighters are responsible for hand-line operations to fight interior fires in the fuselage.  Due to safety reasons (EMS victims located in the aircraft) and Airport operational needs (Engine 110 was still available for medical calls on the Airport) the hand-line was not deployed.  Interior firefighting Standard Operation Guideline #11 has been reviewed by all ARFF staff for proper deployment of hand-lines in a real emergency.  Mutual-aid pumpers were assigned to fight the bus fire with Rescue 14 (T-3000 ARFF unit).  Hand-lines were deployed from Rescue 14 and operated by Windsor Locks FD.  Rescue 14 was re-supplied with water by mutual aid apparatus.   2Mutual aid firefighters used tools off Rescue 14 (piercing nozzle, hand-lines) to familiarize structural firefighters with ARFF crash truck equipment.  Mutual-aid rescue squads and engine companies were assigned to perform extrication operations at the (2) cars and (1) bus scenario.  Multi-Town rescue and fire personnel operated at the extrication site with minor communication issues between agencies as most communication was face-to-face. A variety of extrication tools were used and all extrication operations were completed in an acceptable time frame.  All functions were completed in a safe manner.  Staging The Airport staging area is well identified throughout the area.  A Staging Officer was assigned upon activation of the 2nd alarm.  All communications with outside agencies should be conducted through the staging officer over inter-city radio.  Due to the radio traffic staging had some problems communicating with some of the incoming units.  Some mutual-aid companies kept asking for the Incident Commander over inter-city radio and not the staging officer which caused additional radio traffic.

Water supply early in the drill with limited resources there was a concern related to re-supply operations; this was immediately corrected as more mutual-aid apparatus arrived on scene.  With the amount of fire hydrants in the area problem with additional resources for water supply can be overcome by hand laying hose to a nearby hydrant.  Water supply blueprints are available at the Command Post for quick reference. Incident Command  The Incident Commander (Command-9) immediately identified himself as the Incident Commander over the Bradley Airport FD radio.  Command was established upon activation of the Alert 2.  Initial Command functions and requests were very hard to communicate over the Bradley radio frequency and intercity radio frequency due to the amount of radio traffic.  Command has numerous messages and job functions delayed due to the delay in getting command communications out over the radio.

The transfer of command from Command-9 to Chief 1 (Chief Duffy) was completed over the radio and Command-9 was assigned fire ground operations.  The new Command Post was occupied by Chief 1 and all Command functions operated out of the Command Trailer.  Command still experienced excessive radio traffic which caused a breakdown in operational assignments.

At times command had runners take  3messages to key positions due to the radio traffic (this may not be practical in a real live situation due to limited resources).

Approx 20 minutes into the drill the Incident Commander called to activated the ITAC/ICALL radio system for command functions.  Once the ITAC/ICALL radio system was brought on line, and given to the Fire Operations Officer, EMS Officer, ﬁRed Planﬂ Officer, Troop W Supervisor Troop W dispatch and the ﬁRed Planﬂ Dispatchers, the Command Post gained needed communication with all key positions without radio interruptions.  As one evaluator described it ﬁthe radio communication section of the drill had a pivotal turning point when the ITAC/ICALL radio system was implementedﬂ.  Once ITAC/ICALL was activated all communications between Command and staff were completed and the Incident Commander was able to concentrate on operational issues. Present in the command post and assisting Command during the incident were Mutual aid Fire Officers, ﬁRed Planﬂ Fire Officer, Troop W supervisor, Airport Operations and an Airline representative.  There were some comments from evaluators related to excessive people walking in and out of the command post.  This issue can be corrected by assigning a State Police Trooper to the outside of the command post providing security, denying entry to the command post unless authorized by the incident commander.  The command post in a real incident will require this security measure but during the drill many people were being observers and evaluators which caused some minor confusion. Incident Command operated out of the trailer with limited resources and radio communications were completed through two radios (UHF & VHF) and the ITAC/ICALL radio.  This limited the abilities of the Incident Command post to communicate over different radio frequencies and/or monitor other radio transmissions.  The Command post did not have a dispatcher assigned to perform the radio functions and this kept the Incident Commander busy with the radio instead of performing command functions.  All Evaluators identified a critical function of the command trailer is to have a qualified person controlling radio transmissions for the Incident Commander in a radio room with dispatch style equipment and set-ups (dispatch consoles and multiple radio frequency capabilities). Emergency Medical Services (EMS)  150 Patients were moulaged with assorted injuries and placed on the ground around the DC-9 aircraft with approx 12 patients inside the aircraft.  EMS arrived on scene immediately but had limited resources to start performing functions required during a mass casualty incident.  A Medical Control Officer was assigned by Command and this person attempted to review his resources available to complete numerous tasks.  There was a significant delay in providing triage to patients in the area of  4Taxi Lane ﬁMikeﬂ with evaluators reporting up to 20 minutes passed before any patients were triaged by EMS.  Treatment area and an EMS command area was set-up in an appropriate area.  Distance from the aircraft and the treatment area was adequate and there seemed to be a good transportation structure for ambulances to enter and exit.  A mock hospital was identified at the Maintenance facility and all patients were transported to the hospital by ambulances.  Communication between Command and EMS seemed flawed as there was limited communication being provided to Command.  There was a significant improvement with communications between Command and EMS once the ITAC/ICALL radio was given to EMS.  EMS functions in a mass casualty seem to stress the normal EMS operations in a local community and there is a strong need for a regional training program.  Additional training to strengthen local EMS provider™s knowledge of a regional approach to mass casualty is needed and will be looked into for future training exercises. Law Enforcement  State Police Troop W controlled all of the Law Enforcement issues during the drill.  A sergeant was assigned to the command post and provided face to face communications with the Incident commander.  Law Enforcement provided Police to traffic posts as assigned in the Airport Emergency Plan, Incident Command post security, and assistance at the drill accident scene.  All Law Enforcement objectives were completed and successful. Airport Operations  Airport Operations was notified immediately upon activation of the Alert 2 (Box 1).  Airport Operations representative, David White, was assigned to the Command Post and assisted the Incident Commander during the entire incident.  Airport Operations representatives were a critical component for resources available to the Incident Commander. FAA Box 1 was activated from the Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) to alert the Airport Fire Department, Airport Operations and Troop W dispatch center of the Alert 2.  All communications were clear and concise with the announcement going over the fire station fixed radio system and all firefighter™s portables.  Medical Examiner (M.E.)  The Medical Examiner™s office did not receive notification for assistance.  The initial calling procedures will be reviewed and appropriate corrections will be made for prompt notification.  The M.E.™s office has resources on contract for refrigerated trucks to store bodies and funeral home vendors for body removal.  The temporary morgue did  5not get activated but this was reviewed with the Medical Examiner staff and was available if needed.  Radio communications between the M.E. staff on scene and the Incident Commander was not available.  All of the communications with staff from the M.E.™s office were completed by face-to-face exchange of information with Troop W staff. Salvation Army  Salvation Army conducted a regional drill that was incorporated into this FAA drill.  Salvation Army units from Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut were assembled and provided assistance to numerous emergency services personnel at 4 different incidents.  The Salvation Army staff included internal tests that simulated vehicle breakdowns, equipment breakdowns and other issues that were designed to test their response program.  All Salvation Army objectives were completed and information is being reviewed by Salvation Army Staff. Red Cross  The Red Cross program at Bradley International Airport is being strengthened and new additional training has been provided to the Airport and Airline staff.  This new training was apparent during this drill as we tested the Family Assistance program and there was an overwhelming interest during this part of the drill.  The Red Cross was activated through the ﬁRed Planﬂ and this seemed to alert the team in a timely manner with the Red Cross being at the incident during the early stages which helped with on scene management of the support function that is provided by the Red Cross.  The Red Cross was provided with a ﬁmockﬂ Hotel in a hanger near the accident site.  The mock Hotel was staffed with actors and actresses who played the part of grieving family members looking for answers.  The players for this part of the drill included representatives from numerous Airlines, a person acting as a NTSB spokesperson, Police, EMS and Red Cross assistance workers.  All of the evaluators commented that this scenario had excellent acting players with some actually crying and getting angry with staff for not having answers.  Red Cross staff that participated with this scenario conducted a small review explaining the issues surrounding family assistance during a disaster and the need to practice it more often.  Comments from Airline staff, that were present for this drill, were very positive and everyone requested additional training classes.

Media  The media, both real and acting, gathered early in the morning to get the story.  Real Media consisted of the major television stations in Connecticut and Massachusetts, radio stations and print media.  Before the drill started all real media were advised of the areas that were off limits for filming and the area that media trucks could position to get coverage.  All of the media were advised of the drill™s objective and how it  6would play out.  Ed Lescoe (CRCOG Media representative) was identified as the drill ﬁPublic Information Officerﬂ and planned all of the media coverage and set-up all interviews.  In a real incident this would relieve the Incident Commander of the constant pressure from media to get the story out to the community.  Real media were allowed to mingle throughout the drill area by the injured passengers to get a feel of what each volunteer victim was experiencing.  Mock Media consisted of graduate students from the Connecticut School of Broadcasting and college students from local colleges who had vests that identified them as ﬁMock Mediaﬂ which allowed the local Police to enforce restrictions limiting the press into the accident scene.  Numerous ﬁMock Pressﬂ were approached by Police and escorted out of the Drill area.  The afternoon media briefing was conducted with representatives from Airport Management, Airline staff, (acting) NTSB staff and the Incident Commander.  The reporters were offered a briefing from the Public Information Officer and then they started asking questions.  Many of the questions were well thought out and gave the participants a good feeling of what a real press conference during a mass casualty would be like.  Many people that participated in the ﬁMock Press Conferenceﬂ commented that they were pleased to participate in this part of the drill and asked to have more training on conducting mass casualty incident press briefings.  All of the objectives that were outlined for the media were achieved. Comments  Overall, the drill was a success and the ﬁAirport Emergency Planﬂ has the resources to handle all Airport emergencies.  There are only a few areas of the Emergency Plan that are in need of revisions to strengthen the Airports response to an Airport emergency.  These updates and revisions will give the Airport the opportunity to activate a Regional Emergency Disaster Plan (RED Plan) that has the backing of Local, State and Federal Officials.

Chief Duffy, Airport Fire Chief, was very pleased with the attendance, as this was one of the largest drills ever conducted at Bradley International Airport.  All of the objectives were achieved and information that was compiled from evaluators and participants will be reviewed by the Airport disaster committee.  The following issues will be reviewed by Airport Administration for future revisions to the ﬁEmergency Planﬂ:  Radio communications for Bradley Airport Fire Department and mutual-aid departments responding to the Airport should be reviewed by communication experts to correct radio traffic issues that were observed during the drill.  The last time the Airport Fire Department radio system had significant changes to correct operational issues was in 1986 with the addition of a repeater.  7 EMS coverage for mass casualty incident requires special training that addresses limited resources with a high number of patients.  This drill and past drills have shown the need for local EMS agencies to receive regional training in mass casualty.  This training will bring all of the local EMS agencies responding to the Airport in-line with disaster scene management.

The need exist for the Airport Authority to provide a designated gathering area in the Terminal complex for families and Airline representatives.  This designated area will be for the immediate gathering of families and Airline staff following an aircraft emergency.  This area would be designated as the ﬁfamily reception areaﬂ.  Transportation needs to be available and accessible at this gathering area to move the families to the off airport family assistance center that is set-up by the Red Cross.  There is some confusion as to who makes the initial notification to the Red Cross. Questions were asked as to who the Red Cross would reply to after the initial notification so the Airport Authority has assurances the Red Cross is responding.  The understanding that the Red Cross would have a representative at the ticket counter, Family gathering area and the family assistance center was vague and needs to have better clarification  Feedback from the debrief identifies a need for more Airline, Red Cross and Airport staff training on the Airport family assistance program.  This training will be reviewed by Airport Administration and offered on a more routine basis.

Submitted by:    ____________________________ John Duffy, Airport Fire Chief  8