AFTER ACTION REPORT  2013 FIRE SEASON   1  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The following report is an overview of the response to fires that burned in California during the 2013 fire season where local government proclaimed a local emergency and the Governor proclaimed a State of Emergency. In 2013, the Governor proclaimed a State of Emergency for five fires that threatened life, property, and the environment. The fires were the Silver Fire, the

Powerhouse Fire, the Mountain Fire, the Clover Fire, and the Rim Fire. 

The Governor authorized California Disaster Assistance Act (CDAA) funding for two counties (Mariposa and Tuolumne) affected by the Rim Fire. 

Six Operational Areas (OAs) proclaimed a local emergency. 

The OAs included Los Angeles, San Francisco, Tuolumne, Mariposa, Riverside, and Shasta. Although San Francisco County had no active fire, the fires threatened their power and water supply that resided in the burn area. The fires caused massive destruction but the fires also generated huge smoke plumes that greatly diminished air quality, which became a significant health risk.

Regional Emergency Operations Centers (REOCs) and the State Operations Center (SOC) activated in support of local Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) as needed. However, other than fire and law enforcement mutual aid resources, requests for state resources were limited to air-quality monitoring equipment. The California National Guard (CNG) deployed a remotely piloted airplane during the Rim Fire at the request of Cal OES. The plane was equipped with heat imaging sensors, which provided real-time information. The information improved firefighting capabilities and firefighter safety. 

Statistical Summary Total acreage burned   343,484 Rim Fire:    257,314 Silver Fire:    20,292 Powerhouse Fire:   30,274 Mountain Fire:   27,531 Clover Fire:    8,073

Total Structures Destroyed  437 Rim Fire:    112 Silver Fire:    48 Powerhouse Fire:   58 Mountain Fire:   23 Clover Fire:    196

Total Structures Damaged  35 Rim Fire:    7 Silver Fire:    8 Powerhouse Fire:   4 Mountain Fire:   1 Clover Fire:    15   AFTER ACTION REPORT  2013 FIRE SEASON   2  Incident Period June 3, 2013 Œ October 31, 2013

Declarations and Proclamations Local

Los Angeles County June 3, 2013 (Powerhouse Fire) Riverside County July 18, 2013 (Mountain Fire) Riverside County August 8, 2013 (Silver Fire) Tuolumne County August 19, 2013 (Rim Fire) San Francisco County August 22, 2013 (Rim Fire) Mariposa County August 27, 2013 (Rim Fire) Shasta County September 12, 2013 (Clover Fire)

State of Emergency Los Angeles County July 12, 2013 (Powerhouse Fire) Riverside County July 19, 2013 (Mountain Fire)  Riverside County August 9, 2013 (Silver Fire) Tuolumne County August 22, 2013 (Rim Fire) (CDAA Authorized) San Francisco County August 23, 2013 (Rim Fire) Mariposa County August 29, 2013 (Rim Fire) (CDAA Authorized) Shasta County October 31, 2013 (Clover Fire)

Federal Los Angeles County (Powerhouse Fire)

U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) Declaration Riverside County (Mountain Fire)

SBA Declaration Riverside County (Silver Fire)

SBA Declaration Tuolumne County, Mariposa County (Rim Fire)

Presidential Declaration (DR-4158)  SBA Declaration

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Declaration Shasta County (Clover Fire)

SBA Declaration  AFTER ACTION REPORT  2013 FIRE SEASON   3  Lessons Learned and Improvements Overall, emergency personnel managed the fires effectively. First responders and support personnel provided vital resources. However, a SEMS review provides the opportunity to improve disaster response. The improvement process enhances California™s future disaster responses. Improvements can be applicable to all five SEMS levels (Field, Local, Operational Area, Regional and State).

Summary of Successes Contributors highlighted the following successes:

Cal OES Inland Region staff provided excellent support to their OAs Summary of Areas Needing Improvement Report contributors identified the following issues:

Remote locations hampered interoperable communication systems.  EOC personnel found difficulty disseminating key information.  County departments did not possess a clear understanding of what documentation Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Cal OES required.  Local officials held misconceptions regarding opening, organizing, and operating a Local Assistance Center (LAC).  Local officials mistakenly believed if they waived County Assessor™s fees, the State would reimburse the County for the lost revenue.

One OA found their existing Mass Care and Shelter Plan was outdated when the American Red Cross (ARC) required significant county support for shelter feeding operations and logistics during the initial response phase.  Organizations Contributing to this Report California Governor™s Office of Emergency Services (Cal OES) California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) California Department of Social Services (CDSS) California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA) California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Mariposa County Office of Emergency Services Los Angeles County Office of Emergency Services Riverside County Office of Emergency Services San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) Shasta County Sheriff™s Office  Tuolumne County Office of Emergency Services  